# Bag of Clocks

We can introduce this style of simulation with a description that has no equations.

We use the term discrete event simulation when code tracks the effects of individual events in time. We classify discrete event simulations by the pace of advances in time. If time advances in steps of the same size, it is a *discrete-time* simulation. If time advances to the next event, whenever that event might happen, it is *continuous-time* simulation. This library supports continuous-time discrete-event simulations.

We write discrete event simulations by defining the state of a system and events that can act on that state. The state of a system can be the count of each chemical species for a chemical reaction system. It can be different numbers of chickens at different weights in different chicken coops for a farming simulation. It can be the age of each widget in an engine for a reliability simulation. These states are called the *physical state* of the system and vary widely in what they represent.

Even though nearly every simulation represents a unique system, it is often possible to find enough in common among systems that we can make libraries to help create, simulate, and observe changes of state. For instance, a large class of physical states are counts of things, whether they are molecules, vehicles, or chickens. These states can be represented in code as vectors of integers, and there is a long history of models represented by vectors of integers. Most of this work focuses on using chemical simulation codes to represent not only chemicals but also other systems like vehicles. An older, more general, form of this simulation is the vector addition system, which a later section of this manual describes. However, states don't need to be vectors of integers.

We usually want to simulate systems that have real-valued observations such as ages, temperatures, and distances. These continuous parts of the state of the system mean that the system rarely returns to exactly the same state. There are now an infinite number of possible states of the system, which changes how we would think of the statistics of the system, but it doesn't much change how we handle simulation, because simulation is still driven by events.

An *event* is an observable change of state at a time. It is a function where the argument is the current state of the system and the return value is the new state of the system. We say an event occurs, happens, or fires when we apply that function to the state. How that state changes is up to the model and how it defines the state, but what about *when* that state changes?

Given the current state of the system, there is a set of possible next events which could happen. We call the possible next events *enabled.* Think of the moment in time just after the simulation has begun or an event has just happened. At this moment, there may be multiple enabled events. Which one is next depends on how often that event happens. If our simulation includes both the radioactive decay of an unstable element and decay of iron, the unstable element will usually decay first. We describe the rates of these events using probability distributions in time. Each event has an associated continuous univariate distribution where the variable is time.

We can think of all event distributions in a model as a *bag of clocks.* The next one to ring is the next event to occur. When that event occurs, the state changes. When the state changes, it will enable some events and disable others. Enabled events are added to the bag of clocks. Disabled ones are removed. This library holds the bag of clocks.
